#LyX 2.3 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 544
\begin_document
\begin_header
\save_transient_properties true
\origin unavailable
\textclass article
\use_default_options true
\maintain_unincluded_children false
\language english
\language_package default
\inputencoding auto
\fontencoding global
\font_roman "default" "default"
\font_sans "default" "default"
\font_typewriter "default" "default"
\font_math "auto" "auto"
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100 100
\font_tt_scale 100 100
\use_microtype false
\use_dash_ligatures true
\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\paperfontsize default
\use_hyperref false
\papersize default
\use_geometry false
\use_package amsmath 1
\use_package amssymb 1
\use_package cancel 1
\use_package esint 1
\use_package mathdots 1
\use_package mathtools 1
\use_package mhchem 1
\use_package stackrel 1
\use_package stmaryrd 1
\use_package undertilde 1
\cite_engine basic
\cite_engine_type default
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\justification true
\use_refstyle 1
\use_minted 0
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\is_math_indent 0
\math_numbering_side default
\quotes_style english
\dynamic_quotes 0
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Title
Chapter 5 The Language Instinct How the Mind Creates Language by Steven
 Pinker
\end_layout

\begin_layout Date
Date 10/14/20
\end_layout

\begin_layout Author

\lang spanish
Andrei León Salas
\begin_inset Newpage pagebreak
\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset CommandInset toc
LatexCommand tableofcontents

\end_inset


\begin_inset Newpage pagebreak
\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Summary
\begin_inset Index idx
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout
Summary
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Pinker starts referring the dictionary of words, and that it is as wondrous
 as the world of syntax.
 Words are not just a list memorized in our brain, we have rules in order
 to create new ones, like the wug-test.
 There are 2 places where the tricks of language are used.
 In sentences and phases built our of words by syntax rules, and words by
 self are build our of smaller pieces, with the rules of 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

morphology
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 But English morphology is pathetic compared to other languages, in English
 there less words forms compared to Spanish, Italian and classical Greek.
 He gives specific examples with the languages already explored in past
 chapters, where Kivujo, the most similar one to English, has the verb "Näïkìmly
ìïà,
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 that has more than half million combinations, where English has far less.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
English morphology is not bad, has his own pros, creating derivational words
 from others, like the suffix able converting verb into an adjective.
 Also is easy to compound words, like toothbrush and mouse-eater, making
 the words list as extensive as the sentences we can create, infinite.
 Like sentences, words are too delicate to be generated with a chaining
 device, as example he gives the anti-anti-anti-anti-missiles, where a chaining
 device could not put an adjective between anti and missiles, as it forgets
 the past state of the word.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Word are consisted by morphemes, pieces that fit together in certain ways.
 Like sentences they are like a tree, take the word dogs, divided between
 Nstem dog that is the noun steam and Ninflection that is the noun inflection
 that makes it plural, in that way we can change the noun steam with any
 other noun steam without knowing his meaning, and make a new word.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Another rule is join 2 Nstems creating a new noun like Yugoslavia report.
 It is not an adjective as grammar teachers teaches, as we cannot use Yugoslavia
 as an adjective in a sentence
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The adjective stem says that you can join a verb with able to create an
 adjective, like crunch-chunchable, also works with er and ness
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
All of these creating rules are promiscuous, we can exchange it without
 any problem, in that way, creating the infinite list of words that pinker
 said before.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
We can dissect words even more, the smallest piece of a word is called root,
 without it, there is no word or meaning.
 Using the rules that we check before we can analyze Darwiniannism, where
 Darwin is the Nroot, ian is a Nroottaffix creating the noun Darwinian,
 with the nstemaffix ism we create Darwinianism, and that noun with the
 Ninflection s we create Darwiniansims, 3 levels of a tree is the word Darwinian
sims.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
There are some exceptions to the rules, like the word electricity.
 This is because the original word was created in another language (Latin
 in this case) in which followed the rules of their natural language, so
 we inherited the words, but not the rules.
 And even as we store that word as a tree, we do it with a separation of
 electric and -ity, but this separation does not follows any of the English
 rules we just mentioned.
 This exception and the pattern-look's like rule gave us a whole genre of
 wordplay, to the point that was parodied.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
There are also messy patterns, like irregular plurals and irregular past-tense
 forms, this is because years ago, there was a rule that said that was needed
 to be replaced one vowel with another to form the past tense, as our more
 recent -ed rule.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Pinker explains how this irregular forms were parodied and studied for many
 people, as important as they are, those seems like the epitome of human
 eccentricity and quirkiness.
 This irregular form are explicitly abolished in rationally designed languages
 like Esperanto because of that.
 Irregular forms are roots, that can be found inside steam, that can be
 found inside words, layer after layer, providing an explanation of why,
 for example, people says Walkmans instead of Walkmen.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
There are 2 explanations on how to book on grammar that are wrong.
 One is that we cannot use any new form of irregular form, if new, has to
 be regular.
 Not true as we create words with irregular forms, their past would be irregular
 too.
 The second one is that when a word acquires a new, non literal sense, it
 requires a regular form, but old-mice refute that (regular form should
 be oil-mouses).
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The head of the word dictates what the would means, like overshoot.
 shoot is the head, so overshooting is a kind of shooting.dictating too their
 irregular form that is stored with it, making the past tense of overshoot,
 overshot instead of overshooted.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
As always there are exceptions, like fly out and Walkmans, they are headless.
 And as they are headless, they cannot get their past from their head.
 Like low-life, where their plural is not lives, is low-lifes like any regular
 word.
 Or fly out that cannot use flew or flown, it uses the regular -ed rule
 flied-out.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Continuing with the tree example, irregular forms are at the bottom of the
 tree, where roots and steams are learned directly to the brain as a mental
 dictionary.
 Peter Fordon did an experiment showing how children's minds seem to be
 designed with the logic of word structure built in.
 Using as an example mice-infested and rat-infested, where the last one
 sound wrong.
 The theory of word structure explains it, saying that irregular plurals
 has to be stored as roots or stem in the mental dictionary, and cannot
 be generated by a rule.
 The experiment was with three to five year old children.
 With a puppet he asked 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

Here is a monster who likes to eat mud.
 What do you call him?
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 and he answered mud-eater.
 Later he did the questions without the answer,and the children filled the
 blanks.
 A monster who eat mice was mice-eater, but a monster that eat rats was
 rat-eater instead of rats-eater, suggesting that the rule takes form in
 the unconscious mind of the children.
 Also he proves that it was not a behavior copied from their parents, as
 compounds containing plurals were also produced fine by the children.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Pinker continues explaining the difference between word and sentence, that
 even as word are built of different parts as sentences are, word does not
 have a precise meaning by itself compared to sentences.
 He says that a word is: 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

a linguistic object that, even if built out of parts by the rules of morphology,
 behaves as the indivisible, smallest unit with respect to the rules of
 syntax—a "syntactic atom," in atom's original sense of something that cannot
 be split
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 .
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The rules of syntax avoid words to be able to look inside and find the meaning,
 meanwhile sentences has this property.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Another difference with the sense of word, refers to a rote-memorized chunk:
 a string of linguistic stuff that is arbitrarily associated with a particular
 meaning, retrieved from our metal dictionary.
 A listeme, different from a word, can be a tree branch of any size, as
 long as it cannot be produced mechanically by rules and has to be memorized.
 Even phrase-sized has to be memorized as listemes, like idioms like kick
 the bucket or go bananas.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Pinker then focuses on listemes, trying to show that lexicon, is deserving
 respect and appreciation.d
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
is a myth that people knows few words.
 People say that at average literate people know a few thousand, Shakespeare
 15000, but this is wrong.
 Psychologists uses a different method.
 Start with the largest unabridged dictionary, draw a sample, for example
 the third entry of every eighth left-hand page, and then with each word
 in the sample, ask to choose the closest synonym from a set of alternatives.
 After that multiply the correct proportion by the size of the dictionary,
 and that is the estimate of the person's vocabulary size.
 Also remember that Dictionaries are consumer products, and as they are,
 they inflate the number of entries.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The most sophisticated estimate comes from William Nagy and Richard Anderson,
 they took 227553 different words, from these 45453 are roots and stems,
 and the remaining compounds and derivatives.
 They estimated that 42080 could be understood in context by someone who
 knew their components, in that way, there were already 88533 listeme words.
 With that the estimation was that an average American high school graduate
 knows 45000 words, three times the Shakespeare number.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Even children are estimated to know about 13000 words.
 The brain seems to have a special capacity to learn new words, like a special
 storage just for the mental dictionary as we cannot normally remember that
 amount of specific things in our every days.
 Also we do not learn just memorizing what the other person just said, it
 is necessary to understand the meaning behind the word, the symbol that
 the word represent.
 making the relation between its sound and its meaning utterly arbitrary.
 As Shakespeare said, a rose would still smell sweet even with other name.
 In that way babies does not expect that cattle mean something similar to
 battle, different word, almost the same sound, but completely different
 meaning.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Pinker also mentions 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

the scandal of inductions
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 which applies to scientists and children alike: how can they be so successful
 at observing a finite set of events and making some correct generalization
 about all future events of that kind, rejecting an infinite number of false
 generalizations.
 In programming language we call this the process of abstraction.
 Pinker recalls that this could be part of the common sense, that our mind
 is designed to find and label words by itself.
 We attach words to concepts, and it allows one to share one's hard-won
 discoveries and insights about the world.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset Newpage pagebreak
\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Personal Opinion
\begin_inset Index idx
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout
Opinion
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
For the first part, it was really difficult to follow up some of the words
 and rules.
 I took a English course in Fundatec, so they tough us a lot of specific
 rules, but decompose the words as trees, and specially later with all the
 words parody, make it really difficult to understand the complete sentence,
 as those words are not normally together like that.
 It is nice to be out of the box once in a while, but it is also difficult
 to process it because of that.
 Like idioms, i had to google it as the only one i have ever heard was go
 bananas.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Something that i appreciate of this lecture is that it points out how much
 invisible rules are in the English language, making me fell less bad as
 sometimes, even with all the courses or speaking daily English, i have
 trouble understanding or creating words in English, even then Pinker emphasizes
 how the children could understand easily the sign language, but their parents
 would never be in the same level as his daughter as they were already too
 old.
 Like in the mice-infested and rats-infested, pinker says that it sounds
 wrong, but me as a non native speaker, both sounds correct.
 Anna Maria Di Sciullo and Edwin WIlliams call words, listemes, a unit of
 a memorized list.
 If you change the order of the words, it would not have the same meaning,
 but sentences would keep the meaning.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I agree with Pinker that there are many things that happens almost unconsciously
, and i really like how he explains his points using children.
 I always have thought that children are like a blank sheet, but it is true
 that if that would be the case, they could not surprise us with those unique
 sentences that make us laugh and get surprised.
 At the end the common sense and the Darwin evolution looks like just a
 point, but it is difficult to further explain something that just it is
 what it is.
 
\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
