#LyX 2.3 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 544
\begin_document
\begin_header
\save_transient_properties true
\origin unavailable
\textclass article
\use_default_options true
\maintain_unincluded_children false
\language english
\language_package default
\inputencoding auto
\fontencoding global
\font_roman "default" "default"
\font_sans "default" "default"
\font_typewriter "default" "default"
\font_math "auto" "auto"
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100 100
\font_tt_scale 100 100
\use_microtype false
\use_dash_ligatures true
\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\paperfontsize default
\use_hyperref false
\papersize default
\use_geometry false
\use_package amsmath 1
\use_package amssymb 1
\use_package cancel 1
\use_package esint 1
\use_package mathdots 1
\use_package mathtools 1
\use_package mhchem 1
\use_package stackrel 1
\use_package stmaryrd 1
\use_package undertilde 1
\cite_engine basic
\cite_engine_type default
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\justification true
\use_refstyle 1
\use_minted 0
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\is_math_indent 0
\math_numbering_side default
\quotes_style english
\dynamic_quotes 0
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Title
Chapter 1
\end_layout

\begin_layout Author
Andrei Rolando Leon Salas
\end_layout

\begin_layout Part
Summary
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In the first chapter the author speaks about how the language is a wonder
 of the world.
 Is really important in order to transmit ideas, concepts and events among
 others things.
 Sounds as incredible as telepathy or mind control but it is not.
 Looking the concept of language outside of the box, instead of taking it
 for granted, make us amazed of all the complex things that happens in order
 to be able to use the language.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
At the beginning he refers that with only making sounds with our mouths,
 we can transmit precise ideas to others begins that understand the language.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
He show us, the readers, that he can do that with the writing and listening
 skills.
 He show us 3 different fragments.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
in the first one i imagine as if it were a documentary, even hear the voice
 while Reading, how the octopus male tries to mate with a female of his
 species, and how the “act” is done.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The second one i imagine the specific infomercial, showing me how to clean
 a White suit with soda 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The third one i imagine the situation, the people, even the tone of how
 Tad said 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

I love you
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 Is a couple that Dixie thought that Tad was dead but it was not, but now
 Dixie is married with Brian and also that the son is not Brian's son, but
 Tad
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
With this examples he explains that he transmitted knowledge to us without
 us needing to experience it.
 Even secrets of the drama All My Children with millions of people.And even
 if we need read/write skills, it let us communicate thought time, space
 and acquaintanceship.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
He explains that the human being is an 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

impressive problem solver and engineer
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 to explain we are a clever species, captured in the story of the Tower
 of Babel, which even God felt threatened of us as with an only language
 we could improve a lot our intellect as a specie.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
With communication we can share knowledge, coming from genius, trial and
 error or lucky accident, so we can all have that information without getting
 it in first hand, empowering the race as a whole.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Language is important that people always use it, even if there's nobody
 around, speaking to ourselves, as we can express our self with it.
 Aphasia for example makes the family feel like the person is lost forever.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The book is about human language, but not of his grammatical rules, instead
 of a more basic point of view.
 With the relativity new Cognitive science, there has been big advances
 in the language, and we have become experts in the topic.
 And he is going to transmit that knowledge to us via his book.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
With the new information we have more understanding of the language and
 its role.
 Some people claim that is the most important cultural invention, and it
 is what separates human from other beings.
 Depending of how the individual learns a language affects his ability to
 construct grammatical sentences, as for example English is sometimes contradict
ory and difficult to learn, because it is not as rational as it should be.
 Book's objective is to convince us that all of this is wrong because language
 is not an artifact, is not something that we created, instead is part of
 the biological makeup of our brains.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
As complex as language is, we learned to speak it as a child without conscious
 effort, in the contrary of others skills that we need to learn and do it
 consciously.
 That's why he claims that we learn by instinct, a knowledge we have just
 implanted in our brains, so language is a unique ability to the human being
 as breathing for a lot of living beings.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This concept was first articulated by Darwin at 1871, in The Descent of
 Man he did some observations:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Language is an art, even is is thought different languages, as a base, all
 humans has a tendency to speak.
 It can not be a true instinct as every language have to be learned, but
 differs with ordinary arts, with babies trying to speak babbling, but no
 child has the instinct to bake or write
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
In the modern time, philosopher supposes that language has been slowly and
 unconsciously developed by many steps, instead of thinking that language
 has been deliberately invented
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
So Language is 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

an instinctive tendency to acquire an art
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
William James extended this, explaining that as animals, we also have all
 the instincts as others animals, but our flexible intelligence comes from
 the interplay of many instincts competing, and asking why of any instinctive
 human act.
 For example why we smile when we are happy, instead of scowling.
 People normally answers Of course we smile, of course we love, but they
 don't rationalize about it, it is what is is.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
As mysterious as some animals instincts may be, our instincts are not that
 different, as we also feel good when we follow them.
 We even speak without realizing what we said and embarrass ourselves because
 we just do it, eluding our mental censors.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Noam Chomsky argued that there were 2 fundamental facts about language:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
Every sentence a person said is a new combination of word in the universe,
 so it cannot be an action-reaction effect, instead is a recipe or program
 that can generate infinite sentences with the words the persona knows
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
Children develop complex grammars skills rapidly and without formal instruction,
 so children should come with an basic Universal Grammar that helps them
 learning the language (no matter which one)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Chomsky also said that was curious how everybody have for granted how the
 physical structure of an organism is genetically determined, with all the
 variations that there are as size, rate of development and even external
 factors change human himself.
 In the same way is generally assumed that social environment is the dominant
 factor in the human cognitive systems, but when seriously investigated
 are as intricate as the physical ones.
 Based on this proposes that language should be studied as complex as the
 body.
 With this Chomsky and other linguists proposer that there's a Universal
 Grammar below all others.
 Actually there's thousands of more people studying the cognitive system
 and, thus, language.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The book is deeply influenced by Chomsky, but is not the story that Chomsky
 would said, as Chomsky argue against Darwinian natural selection, but author
 thinks that it is a evolutionary adaptation as any other.
\begin_inset Newpage newpage
\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Part
Personal opinion
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I found this part interesting, as i never stop myself to think the language
 as something rational of instinct.
 I feel curious how the author is going to go deeper in the topic and argue
 why language is something biological and instinctive instead of something
 rational.
 I first thought as we need to be rational to be able to speak,as one of
 the things makes the human being different from animals is his ability
 to think.
 But as i finished the chapter i started to thing, well what if being rational
 is also something that started as a instinct.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
To be honest, i need to think more of this topic as i only started today
 to thing about this specific topic, and normally i try to learn from different
 points of view before having a concussion for myself.
 Also i can connect how this concept of language relates to the one in programmi
ng, as right now my opinion is that computer language is something completely
 artificial created by us, and cant see how instinct could related to something
 so artificial.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Finally i think Pinker could have a biased opinion as himself wrote that
 Chomsky had a power full personality, but not as much as it could, as he
 at the end explains that differs with him in various topics
\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
